Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (NYSE:WMT) Raymond James 37th Annual Institutional Investors Conference March 8, 2016 1:05 PM ET
Executives
Brett Biggs - Chief Financial Officer
Steve Bratspies - Chief Merchandising Officer
Analysts
Budd Bugatch - Raymond James
Operator
Good afternoon, I’m Budd Bugatch with Raymond James. It’s my privilege and pleasure to welcome you this afternoon to the Wal-Mart presentation at our 37th Annual Investor Institutional Investors Conference. I trust everybody had a good lunch. With us today from Wal-Mart we are very pleased to have Brett Biggs, Chief Financial Officer of the Company. And giving the presentation today, we have Steve Bratspies, who was recently named the Chief Merchandising Officer of the Company. Without any further ado, Steve, floor is yours.
Steve Bratspies
Thanks, Budd. Good afternoon everybody. As Budd mentioned, I have been Chief Merchandising Officer just a short period of time, almost five months now in the company, but I’ve been with Wal-Mart for about a decade. So I’ve done a lot of different things to the company, marketing and merchandising and now have the honor to lead a great merchandising team at Wal-Mart U.S. I am very proud of.
We got a great, strong leadership team really good plan that we are very focused on delivering and while I am going to spend a little bit of time with you today is to see a top line of what that plan is on what we are focused on, but more importantly how we are going to merchandise. I’m going to dive down and talk to you about what I’m focused on, what my team is focused on to help deliver the U.S. plan.
Start, I always have to put the forward-looking statements, disclaimer up you guys all know this, it better than I do, but I thought put it up there just so I’ll cover it. Any questions you can see it at our website as we go forward.
So let me talk to you about growth. And I want to start by taking a quick step back, quick look back at the release that we just made. We just made our Q4 release couple of weeks ago, and comp sales for the U.S. were positive for the sixth consecutive quarter at 60 basis points driven by the fifth consecutive quarter of positive traffic growth in the stores.
Neighborhood markets delivered nearly 7 comps during that time. And as you know we’ve been investing heavily in our business, heavily in our people, in the talent and technology and its’ really starting to pay off for us as we could see improving customer experience scores across the U.S. business.
Globally, commerce sales were at 8% for the fourth quarter and 12% for the year last year on a constant currency basis. We expanded our online grocery business to 22 markets and we’ll do about another 20 markets this year as we continue to invest in that business and continue to find the intersection of physical and digital. We are getting great responses from our customer on this for satisfaction scores already in the mid-90s. So we feel good about where we are going on that.
So, lots of progress that we feel good about, but we know we got a lot of work to do, and we are very focused on delivering in the future for our customers and for our shareholders. And for us to do that it really all begins with our customer. I am going to spend a little bit of time talking about the customer today, a little bit of a deeper dive understanding at some of the things that we are learning as we go forward.
The customer today is changing dramatically. Who they are, what they want, how they shop, where they shop, when they shop, lots of different changes that are going on all at one time. 79 million of them are millennials, and what’s great is they are moving into prime spending years, right. They started a little slower in household formation, they are moving faster and are in that time right now.
48% of them are multi cultural, versus 285 from the boomers, which is a dramatic shift and dramatic change in the business. They are the most value driven generation that was seen in my life time, slightly ahead of Gen X but they are very, very focused to value to lines for Wal-Mart. And they also had a strong infinity for Wal-Mart than any of the generations.
66% of millennials have shopped at Wal-Mart store in the past month. And they are more likely than the total population to shop Wal-Mart store. So it’s a very important customer to us, the one that aligns very well with our business. Busy customers that demand a new level of convenience, new expectations, really what they want is, they want to see more shopping experience. They want to shop Wal-Mart, they don’t care if it’s online, they don’t care if it’s mobile, they don’t care if it’s in the store, they want it to be a seamless shopping experience for them and that’s what we are working on delivering.
We are seeing some good results. We continue to capture more than our fair share of millennial customer spending with especially those millennials that have kids already. We increased our market share with millennial mass by 450 basis points over the last few years and a lot of people ask why are we doing that, what’s working.
Fundamentally it’s because we have the products that they want. They like our grocery, they like our babies assortment which is obviously very important for them at the stage or life that they are in right now. Convenient locations, they definitely subscribe to the one stop shopping, again you are talking young families, household formations, one stop shopping is a huge convenience to them and ultimately our low price model and budget approach to shopping works very well for them, is very value conscious.
Our best shoppers are the ones who shop with us not only in stores, but they shop online. And if you think about that intersection of physical and digital, we talk a lot about as a company, plays out in how customer spend. They spend more; they shop more frequently when they shop all channels, so just some numbers for you.
Wal-Mart store only customer spends on average about $1,400 a year. An online customer only spend a couple of hundred dollars. The customer who shops both, online and in the store spend about $2,500 with us on average in a year. So that customer is in the middle of the intersection of those two circles is incredibly valuable for us and as they continue to build that behavior we are going to continue to take advantage of it.
So let me take a minute and give you high level Wal-Mart in U.S. strategy and this is nothing new. You heard this from us before, Greg Foran, my boss has talked about this, but I thought I would set the context quickly for what we are trying to do. And ultimately that’s delivered a seamless shopping experience of the scale. We think we are well positioned to do that in a way that no one else has been able to do that so far.
And there is four key planks to enable us to do that. Number one, winning new stores and it’s all about what we are doing to provide an excellent experience for our customers who are there. We made a lot of investments in that area and people and the technology but make our stores fundamentally run better.
The second is delivering value. Low price has always been our key differentiator in the market and we are going to continue as we invest to grow, we are going to continue to invest in pricing. We are not going to comprise on any quality or any products as we do that, so pricing quality investments are going to be very important to us going forward.
The third one which is near and dear to my heart being great merchants. We’ve got to run great stores and we’ve got to have great product in that stores. And as merchants we have to think through how the product flows into the store, how it flows through the shelf, all the way up to the register, making that as seamless as possible for our stores so they can operate better. It’s about great product, executing great programs in our stores, seasonal programs and bringing to life great brands.
And finally, it’s about providing convenience. We really believe that we are uniquely positioned with the footprint that we have on a physical basis to add the digital to that and provide a few more shopping experience for merchandise across all channels as we go forward.
So that’s the U.S. strategy, let me talk to you about merchandising. Let me talk to you about what I am focused on, what my team is focused on every single day to make our business better. And it’s three things. Its’ customer advocacy, it’s continuing to improve our cost position and its service to our stores. Let me touch on each one of this in a minute.
Customer advocacy, it’s pretty self explanatory, but it really just needs to be obsessed with customers. It’s putting the customer at the centre of every single thing that we do, and creating experience with them that’s valuable, fun, exciting and basically worth their time, that’s what we have to do. We have to keep focusing on them all the time.
Our cost position, this company is built on a promise in a purpose to save money, live better, it always has been and it always will be. It’s what we are known for and it’s what we stand for and we are going to consistently guard that position in the market place and make investments overtime to make sure that we provide the absolute best value for our customers and to do that we have to run a strong EDLC model. We have to continue to take costs out of our business to be able to invest in price as we go forward.
And finally, service to our stores. If you are a merchant at Wal-Mart, you serve two bosses. You serve the customer number one, and number two you serve the stores. And your job is to help the stores run more efficient, how do they improve their efficiencies once again so we can take cost out so we can continue to invest in our business. We have a lot of aggressive plans around, order fill rates, greater efficiency at the shelf; improve speed, and creating a lot more customized programs at the local level to drive our business.
What I want to talk to you mostly today is about the first one, which is customer advocacy. And what do we do to drive royalty, to create a better customer experience and ultimately to earn the trust of our customers so that they can see to come back time and time again.
So the first piece of customer advocacy is where we need to start is with our fresh business. Why do we start with Fresh? Because we walked into Wal-Mart so what’s the first thing you see? You see Fresh. It sets the tone for the experience of your entire shopping trip with Wal-Mart. It’s a huge priority for us, because it’s a big traffic driver and it’s very important to our customers. And we know when we get fresh right, the entire box benefits from that business as we go forward and we’ve got really comprehensive plans, we called all the way from farm to fork. So what do I mean by that?
We are looking at how source product, where we source it from globally, how we change seasons more effectively, all the way to fork. It’s not just about having fresh products in our store; it needs to be fresh when you take it home. When you experience it, two, three days later out of your refrigerator, it needs to still be fresh product, how do we extend that overtime. And that’s ultimately our focus.
People often ask so what’s different, when am I going to see your stores. When you go into our stores this year, I think you are going to see a couple of things. One, you are going to see better assortment, improved quality, better presentation of products. The wet wall in our produce area is different, it’s been flipped, we are going to lead off with fresh both vegetables, the set of fresher tone right on atonality, and we’ve expanded space for cut through which is a huge growth business for us. We’ve changed our assortment mix between bag and both [ph] products all to make sure the assortment is better for the customer.
The shopping experience is going to be different. We are rolling out a project that we call Fresh Angle rollout. And what is as we walk into a frozen department, we are reorienting all the fixturing in there and lowering the profiles. So you are going to be able to come here, you are going to have more space, you are going to have more sideline, able to see the wet walls, see the valley, easier to shop, it’s going to change dramatically the looking field of our produce department. We have it in a 180 stores right now; it will be in about 3,300 by the end of the year, so a pretty big rollout for us.
And also, much better in store execution. We’ve made a lot of investment in wages as you all know about and the department managers back we are also adding in we called Fresh Operations Manager at the market level to have an expert in every single market to teach, train and build capabilities in the stores on an ongoing basis.
And ultimately as I talked about earlier, better freshness. Freshness is the key at how you actually judge the product. We’ve taken a full day at inventory out of our supply chain over the last few years to make sure that we continue to provide that fresher experience.
So we’re optimistic about our growth in this area and we are always seeing some great results. 52-week produce market share up 44 basis points, organic market share up 80 basis points in the last 52 weeks. So, the customer is responding to what we are doing. We expect these investments to pay off in the short term and the long term and we are pretty confident about what we are doing and the customer perception improvement that we are seeing across the department is the best measure to tell us that we are working on the right things.
Second area, how do we build relationships and trust customers private brands. We’ve always had a big private brand business across Wal-Mart and it’s across the entire business. GM, Softline, food consumables, but customers are asking more and more from more private brands. It’s a key loyalty driver and those customers who buy it, who are -- participate in private brands they make more trips and they spend more. And where they commonly make those incremental trips 50% of what they spend is on branded products. So we know what they doing, its building a more engaged relationship and it’s a deeper penetration of how they shop at Wal-Mart and why they shop Wal-Mart.
The penetration of brand, the private brand is increasing both in skew count and in new items. So, the density of that in our stores is going to continue to increase. We believe winning with private brands come down to three things, its price innovation and quality and we are spending a lot of effort to invest in product development, sourcing technology, new talent to be able to build this business.
For those of you who visit us in Bentonville, and while I encourage you to come see us, we are building a best-in-class product development and sensory lab right in Bentonville right at our home office that will have opened in just a couple of months, which will give us whole new level of capability for us to build as we go forward.
Now one of the question I get asked a lot of time I thought our private brands is when you are always have to say you are house of brands. And so what does that mean, how do you think about that? And what I would tell you is we always have been a house of brands, and we always will be house of brands. National brands are incredibly important to us, number one because our customers want them. Number two, it’s a fundamental part of the EDLP program. We show price value by customers comparing national brands to one another. So none of that is changing as we do this, but it’s going to be a balance of both as we go forward.
The next business that really is growing and becoming a more and more important part of our business is our Health and Wellness area. Everybody knows that healthcare always ranks among the top concern of the entire population let alone just our customers. And in boomers age more and more of this is going to become a bigger and bigger issue for the society. And that’s why we are continuing to invest and expand our portfolio here to serve customers better and then for us it’s all about access and affordability in this area.
Today we operate 4,500 pharmacies, 2,900 vision centers all demonstrating strong growth across the business. We worked and really how do we engage these customers even further. This is an area where health and wellness its’ all about trust. When you look at the customer, I have to trust you in my health and wellness business and the best measure I have to show trust is our immunizations business has doubled in the last year. So to me there is nothing it says trust more than I’m going to let you stick a needle in me in the middle of a store.
So we feel pretty good about that as a good leading indicator and that customers trust us more and more as we go forward. Just to give you one example of something that we are doing in this business area, it’s called the America’s biggest health fair and we did it the first time in October, where in a four day period we delivered 50,000 immunizations, 280,000 health screenings and we distributed almost 200 million healthy product samples. And we look at those numbers and say wow, that’s great the scale of our ability to do this.
But what’s really powerful about this is we’re going to take it down to an individual customer and we got dozens and dozens of stories coming out of this health fair and just one that I’ll share with you.
There is a woman in one of our stores in Atlanta who came in, had a blood pressure screening. And the store immediately called 911. They took this woman to the hospital; her blood pressure was 255/160. And she was about to have a stroke or heart attack and the doctors and her family contacted the store afterwards and said she was going to have a major medical event within a few hours if she had not been in a Wal-Mart store at this healthcare and gotten her blood pressure checked.
So it’s just one example. Again, the numbers are big but we like to take it all the way down to an individual customers and pretty powerful stuff that we can do for our customers to help them on the Live Better part of our promise.
Convenience. How do we improve customer experience? How do we think about shopping in the future and how do we change our business as we go forward? Nearly, 90% of the U.S. population lives within 10 miles of Wal-Mart store. So, we have access basically to the entire U.S. population just based on our current layout and our stores. So, we are going to continue to provide more access and more conveyance to those customers in three key ways.
The first is with pickup. And we are really making some good meaningful progress here. Customers keep telling us how much they liked it. This is when a customer goes online, orders an item and he comes in a store and then pick it up for free, often within the same day. It’s been a real priority for us over the last year. The business spiked dramatically during the holiday time, lots of huge volume. That volume has continued on. Customers are excited about it. It provides instant easier access to the great assortment that we have in our store without them having to go do a lot of work.
Second piece, online grocery. I mentioned it earlier but customers love the ability to shop online, order the groceries and come to a store and never even get out of their car. Open their trunk, we will put the groceries in their trunk for them and move right on. These customers represent a larger basket and many of them are new incremental customers to Wal-Mart. And as I said earlier, customer satisfaction is in the 90s of this business. Customers really like it. We’ve expanded it to over 20 markets already and we will do another 20 markets as we rollout this year and continue to build this business.
And the final piece is Wal-Mart App. And it’s one of the top three apps in retail. We’ve got tens of millions of customers who use it and it’s all about continuing to add new tools, new capabilities to the app. It’s pretty helpful today if you want to go shop a supercenter to find the product and the aisle locator where you want that product. But recently, we added to it and we introduced Wal-Mart Pay, which is an example of how this app gives customers a seamless experience between digital and physical.
It just takes the digital world and brings it to the store and makes the store that much more convenient that much simpler. It’s a really, really cool application. It’s unbelievably simple and we will be rolling that out through the rest of the country through the first half of this year. I really believe in this area going back to that 90% within 10 miles, we can do what nobody else can really do effectively on a big scale and that’s marry e-commerce with a physical location and that’s what we are really focused on rolling out over the next couple years.
Everything I just said is always powered and anchored in what you know from us, which is we are going to be running EDLP business and we are going to power it by EDLC. We are going to deliver that consistent stable pricing that builds trust with our customers. That’s why they come back to us because they trust the price that they are getting from us every single day. To do that and do that really well, we have to continue to improve our low cost position. We are doing a lot of work to drive costs out of our system across the entire franchise.
A few things we are doing specifically that we focused on is taking all, most of the co-op marketing out of our business and encouraging our supplier partners to put that into the cost of goods, reducing the number of tabs that we have in the marketplace. We had over a 100 few years ago. We will be down under 20, as we go forward.
We are working to get to more consistent terms and allowances to take costs out of the business, operating with our suppliers and looking at every single aspect of our business from sourcing to logistics, to technology. How do we continue to improve our cost position? So, ultimately, we can deliver on our EDL promise to our customers and not compromise on quality.
So, as a merchant, I couldn’t stand here today and not talk to you about items because we know -- Budd, we talked about earlier. We are an item driven business. We’ve always been and we will always going to continue to be. So, I want to share just a couple items with you that are examples of great EDLPs that you can find in our store right now. So last year -- I’m grabbing some products.
Last year, we sold a $1.68 Cami in our store, sold millions of items and it’s this program called Shocking Value that we have in our apparel business. We are following that up this year with a $2.87 No Boundaries T-Shirt. When we will have done, I would encourage you come up, feel the quality and touch this product. This is incredible quality product for $2.87. You are going to see masked out tables in our stores, great arrangement of colors, really, really looks good.
We are also going to give lot of fun this summer with a product called Bubble Wands. We are going to sell a six pack of Bubble Wands for $3.88. We say okay that sounds good. We are going to sell 6 million of them. Last year, this product was $4.97 and we sold a million of them. This year we are going to sell 6 million to $3.88. And how we are going to do that? One, rollback of the price, but you are going to see masked displays right in front of the customers. It’s a great item that we will have a lot of fun with.
And the last one is great seasonal item which is Peeps. As we head into Easter time, I’m sure you’ve all had Peeps and I’m sure you all love the taste of Peeps. Well, we are going to sell them at $1 this year, which will be a 20%, 25% value to anyone in the market and we also have what we call Mystery Peeps. There is three mystery flavors this year. So, I would encourage you to go try it, only at Wal-Mart and we will reveal them at the week of Easter. But just examples of fun exciting items at great prices that make a difference in our business.
So, as we work on building the fresh business, as we work on building a global e-commerce business, the one thing we are never going to forget and we are never going to walk away from this Wal-Mart is great item merchandising at EDLP pricing because that’s what drives our business and that’s what our customers love when they come to see us.
So let me just wrap up my time with you and just kind of leave you with a couple thoughts. One, I think we’ve got a really clearly defined strategy in the U.S. It’s about winning with stores. It’s about delivering value, being great merchants and then providing convenience to our customers. My team’s role, merchandising’s focus is about executing that strategy and what are we focused on. We are going to be focused on the customer. We are going to put the customer at the centre of everything that we do. We are very focused on improving our cost positions so we can invest in price over time and make sure that we serve stores as effectively as we possibly can. I think we are on the right path. Traffic, comps, satisfaction with the customer all improving and we are working on the right things and we are encouraged about our progress so far.
So, thank you for your time. And I guess we will probably do some questions.
Budd Bugatch
We have some time for questions. Let’s start. Let’s deal with some questions.
Question-and-Answer Session
Q - Unidentified Analyst
As you continue to grow the health and wellness franchise and look to strengthen your cost position, there are examples in the market of deals directly between for instance pharma companies and pharmacies like the Walgreens, Valeant deal. As you evaluate your relationships with the wholesalers like an AmerisourceBergen or McKesson, can you just talk about how you view those relationships versus going directly to large pharma companies given your scale?
Steve Bratspies
Yes. Thanks for question. I would say very important relationships to us and there has been a lot of change in the marketplace over the last couple years, different mergers, different programs going on. We are always looking at options to figure out what’s the best way to run our business. It’s a business that we are going to continue to invest in. It’s incredibly important to us and to our customers. So, we are going to always evaluate what’s the best way for us to do that. But those relationships that brought us this far in this business are very important to us and we are going to build upon it.
Budd Bugatch
Questions? I will ask one. Several years ago at this conference, Bill Simon made a really good case about the outsized market share that Wal-Mart had at the weekly shop and part of the impetus of the Neighborhood Market and the Wal-Mart Express test was to develop a better market share of the midweek shop. Can you give us kind of an update on where we are on that process and what the current thinking is of the leadership?
Steve Bratspies
Yes. Sure. Thanks, Budd. Yes, worth looking at is when you run a business a size that we run we need to participate in every shopping trip that exists out there. And one of the reasons we continue to lean into invest in the Neighborhood Market franchise is it serves that need really, really well. It’s our convenience format, which customers like to do, the smaller shopping trip to as they go forward.
We build 85 to 95 more of them this year than we have going forward. So, we are going to continue to invest. We are working all the programs that I talked about today apply to Neighborhood Markets as well. Improving our fresh business there, making them more convenient. We continue to lead and to pick-up in those stores to make them more productive as we go forward. But that midweek shopping trip continues to be a big part how customers are shopping and changing their behavior and we are using the Neighborhood Market particularly to go after that.
Budd Bugatch
And you have been redoing Neighborhood Markets to get that. How does that feel and where are you now in that innovation? You’ve made a couple of new Neighborhood Markets near the Home Office that have had some different items. Where are we on that?
Steve Bratspies
We have. There is a couple of different protos that we are working on in our local area, in the Home Office. Couple things. We are changing the fresh layout in those stores. Lowering profiles, creating more shopping space, adding to the assortment there in fresh, building out our daily business and adding more capabilities, things like new pizza programs and things like that in those businesses, making those stores convenient by splitting the aisles.
A lot of times you go into Wal-Mart, one of the complaints customer has a long runs. So in Neighborhood Markets and the new protos they are split aisles, which creates more opportunity for us. We are expanding the baby department in Neighborhood Market in stores that it makes sense, all to serve that customer better over time, so just a few examples of things that we are working on.
Unidentified Analyst
Sometimes ago, I have read a story that you are closing down shops in let’s say rural areas because the population was not big enough. You plan to address that issue with let’s say Drop-off stations or something like that to give them at least a chance to buy something.
Steve Bratspies
Yes. Let me just start with these closing stores. We did close about 150 stores at the end of last year, which was really part of a very large comprehensive global portfolio review, as to where we are in terms of what are the best assets that we have, how do we optimize them and where do we want to invest and where do we not want to invest.
The total closures of that business was less than 1% of our total square footage on a global basis, so not a tremendous amount. But all of those stores from the U.S. were our Express stores and many of those were located in some rural areas. That Express store pilot that we ran, it was a 105 stores, I think is the exact number.
Basically, we decided that it didn’t fit the model of operating that we wanted to have in the future. Many of those locations, we actually wish we had build the Neighborhood Market in quite frankly. So, as we’ve gotten more encouraged with our Neighborhood Market results, we don’t think or we know that the Express business doesn’t fit into our model as we go forward.
In terms of reaching more rural area, that’s a real estate kind of analysis play that we will always do. We are always looking for new markets. We are going to continue to build the stores. We are just not going to build Express stores in those markets that we’ve build. We are going to build the Supercenter. We are going to build the Neighborhood Market.
Unidentified Analyst
So the company’s unilateral decision to raise wages, which has increased your U.S. cost structure by $2.7 billion, doesn’t that really inhibit your ability to invest in price and thus driving any kind of comp going forward?
Steve Bratspies
So the $2.7 billion is an investment that we made for a couple different reasons. One, we need to invest in our associates and our stores, which has always been a strong plank for Wal-Mart in the U.S. and around the globe. So, we wanted to invest in them. Part of that investment is also adding labor to the stores or adding department managers, adding technology, adding capabilities to serve customers much better in our stores.
So, $2.7 billion, that’s not a small number, right. We made a big investment, which obviously you saw what it did to how we position ourselves from an earnings perspective. But what we think that’s going to do is position us for the long-term to grow our comp sales business as we continue to invest and make the experience in our stores better.
Now for price, I talked about what we are trying to do on costs, continuing to take costs out of the system. This year, we are going to start to invest in price again as a business and you are going to see a multi-billion dollar investment over the next couple years. The approach that we basically took was and I think Doug and Greg have used this phrase before. You can’t invite people over your house for dinner before you clean up the house and that’s what we needed to do. And we didn’t think spending a lot of money on price before we improved the performance of our stores, before we improved the experience would be a prudent investment.
Now that we are getting to the point, we feel better about how our stores are being run, how they are being operated, the customer experience in there we are ready to start spending money against price. Our fast, clean and friendly scores, which is how we ultimately kind of measure the metrics of our operators right now, we put a very high bar in place for them last year. 76% of the stores reached that bar and then we flip the calendar and then we raise the bar again and then working back up to climbing that leader to have better fast scores, better cleanliness scores and more convenient stores for our customers. Once we have that, we are going to continue to invest in price.
Budd Bugatch
Just piggybacking on your last comment, one of the big issues has been the back rooms, cleaning up the back rooms, taking inventory out of that.
Steve Bratspies
Yes.
Budd Bugatch
I think that's been a big push of Greg's because he believes if the back rooms are really well organized then the shrink goes down. Shrink was an issue that I think hit us at one of the quarters last year. Where are we in that process? Are all the back rooms clean like you want them?
Steve Bratspies
Sure. No, they are not all clean the way I want them but we are making good progress. And there is lot and there is couple different things happening there. One, clean back room is two things. It’s how you flow product into the store and then ultimately, what are the back room processes you run and the floor processes you run to get it out, so a lot of changes going on in flow. But what I will talk about is in the store. We have a new process that we call CAP. We are rolling out top stock, which is you could see top shelves above where we can put product. Our buyers, some of them I have here with me today are working on pack and a half compliance in our stores, so more product fits on the shelf.
So our back rooms are, I would say significantly better and I have been in some back rooms that are almost completely clean at this point. But not every back room across the franchise is that way. We are making meaningful progress but more work to do but I’m encouraged. Ultimately, when we run a clean back room, what it really means is we are better in stock and our in-stock is better. And when our in-stock is better, we sell more, comps improve. So, we are very focused ultimately on in-stock for the customers and we run a tight efficient backroom process, it allows us to stay in stock on the floor.
Budd Bugatch
Thank you very much. We will continue with the breakout.
